docs: Package structure RFC (#1)
CMIP-REF/rfcs: text/0001-package-structure.md

- RFC PR: [CMIP-REF/rfcs#0001](https://github.com/CMIP-REF/rfcs/pull/0001)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC proposes how we should structure the git repository to enable the rapid development of the project while it is immature.
The core of the project will have some reuse outside of the REF frontend
so it should be publishable as a separate package.
The goal is to make it easier for users to extend the project with new metrics providers.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

* At the start of this project we will be in a state of flux until we have a working prototype.
 APIs will change, and we will be adding and removing features.
* Each metrics package will come with its own set of dependencies. Odds are that they will clash with other packages.
* We want something that is easy to extend in future, incorporating new metrics providers/metrics.
* Consistent tooling across the project

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

It is proposed that we start with a mono-repo structure consisting of multiple packages,
each with their own set of dependencies.
The tooling and CI will be shared across all projects.

> There will be a `packages` directory at the root of the repo, with each package in its own subdirectory.

Reviewer: So the package is one of benchmarking packages,  will its development here be synced back to its original external repo or vice verse?

Author: No the package in the ref repo (say `ref-metrics-ilamb`) will have the benchmarking package as a dependency (or at least available via in a docker container so it could be called from Python). I hope that no modifications to the benchmarking package are required. 

This package provides a compatibility layer between what the REF needs and what the benchmarking packages provide. For ILAMB since it it CMEC-compliant, that will involve running, creating the CMEC configuration files needed and running `cmec-driver`.

An example has been implemented in [CMIP-REF/cmip-ref#1](https://github.com/CMIP-REF/cmip-ref/pull/0001),
which contains a `ref-core` package and an example `ref-metrics-example` package.

Each package will have a `README.md` file that describes the purpose of the package and how to use it,

> its own `pyproject.toml` describing the package and it's dependencies, 

Reviewer: Beside the "pyproject.toml", the "setup.py" file also can be used or not recommended? If both files in a package directory, we may need to keep their dependencies same.

Author: Maybe this needs to be expanded to suggest that the benchmark package maintainers can use whatever build backend they prefer. The use of `setup.py` suggests the use of `setuptools` as a build system which coexists with the use of `pyproject.toml` file.

As far as I know you don't need to duplicate dependency definitions if you specify setuptools as the build system in pyproject.toml, but I haven't tried:

```
[build-system]
requires = ["setuptools"]
build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"
```

https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/modernize-setup-py-project/#modernize-setup-py-project

and their own set of tests.
The test suite for each package is run with only the dependencies required for that package.

A common set of integration tests will also be run to ensure that the packages work together.

The purpose of this structure is to split the project into smaller, more manageable parts
and to differentiate between the "library" part of the project which is reusable
and the "application" which builds ontop of the library + metrics packages + additional services.

An additional benefit is that it will be easier to refactor code if it is all accessible in the same repository.

## Packages
### `ref-core`
This package will be a library containing the core functionality of the REF.
This package will be a dependency of all other packages as it will describe the interfaces that metrics providers must implement. 
This allows us to keep the core functionality separate from the metrics providers.

> ### `ref-metrics-*`

Reviewer 2: It would be easier for people who want to use the REF with a custom metric provider if these were maintained outside of the main REF repository. If we move the example to a separate repository, it will be much easier for relative outsiders to see how to implement the interface because they don't have to dig through all of the REF infrastructure and configuration to find what they're looking for.

Author: Good point.

Let's migrate the example outside of this repository. It is probably best to wait until we are happy with a PoC as it is easier to refactor all in one spot. We will also require publishing the `ref-core` package to PyPi/CondaForge first.

Perhaps something for the new year.

Each metric provider will implement a separate package that implements the interfaces described by the `ref-core` package.
These will very thin packages that wrap around the existing APIs of the benchmarking packages or use CMEC to execute.

An example package `ref-metrics-example` has been implemented in [CMIP-REF/cmip-ref#5](https://github.com/CMIP-REF/cmip-ref/pull/5).
See the [code](https://github.com/CMIP-REF/cmip-ref/tree/basic-interface/packages/ref-metrics-example) for more details.

The purpose of these packages are to provide a Python-based hook to execute a metric and return the results.
This will include (hopefully thin) wrappers around the metric providers existing APIs
or build the required CMEC configuration files.
It should require little to no change to the existing codebase benchmarking packages.

The repository will set up a CI pipeline that will run the unit tests for each package.
This includes fetching some sample data.

These packages will maintain their own dependencies (python and otherwise) and packaged up as a docker image.

The package will be named `ref-metrics-<provider>` where `<provider>` is the name of the provider.

> ### `ref-api` (TBD)

Reviewer 2: The way I understand it, there are at least two use cases that each need their own application.
1) An automated system running on an ESGF node that listens to the ESGF message queue announcing that new datasets have been published and then kicks off the required diagnostic runs and integrates/publishes the results.
1) Human users who want to run the tool themselves, this could be from the command line or from a Jupyter notebook

It looks like this proposes 1), but maybe it would be more convenient to start with 2) as having that is convenient for development. Or is that covered somewhere else already?

Author: I would add/tweak another one:
1) Production deployment
2) Modelling center where they are ingesting their pre-published data. Probably by running a CLI command. This requires a bulk of the services needed for a production deployment if they want to track results.
3) Running metrics directly via a common interface without any tracking of results

I'm assuming that modelling centers want some form of tracking, but that is only a guess so we should validate that. The tracking requires a database which in likely just sqlite which doesn't require any additional services.

There is a lot of overlap of 1 and 2, but 3 is probably how benchmarking package maintainers will develop their packages. Each of the metrics packages should be able to be run directly in a notebook as well if you don't require the complexity that comes from the "compute engine".

This application package will bring together the core and metrics packages to provide a service that
responds to new data submissions,
tracks the execution of metrics and the results.
The package may have indirect dependencies on the metrics packages to avoid conflicting dependencies.

> That adds additional complexity, but will be more flexible in the long run.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this means, I would recommend leaving this out or making it more explicit what is intended.

This is the service that will be deployed to ESGF alongside any additional services that are required.

Whether this application can be done solely via a CLI-based tool is up for debate.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* More people working in the same repository may lead to more merge conflicts.
* Larger repository with more moving parts/concepts

Another drawback is that it will be harder to manage different package managers.

> The project currently uses [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) as a package manager as the core and framework

Reviewer: I have no experience with uv. I have used mamba as conda is too slow,  but I found that mamba will break package dependencies in some cases. I do not know if uv will have the similar problem, particularly for some scientific packages as you mentioned that their dependencies are more complex.

Author: The downside of UV is that it only supports `pypi` dependencies so any more complex, non-wheel dependencies will need to be sourced elsewhere which is where Conda shines. AFAIK EsmValTool is the only benchmarking package that has a hard dependency on Conda? @bouweandela

I foresee the requirement for package maintainers to build and distribute docker images with working environments which should give ultimate freedom as to which package manager they use. The current proposed repository structure does not preclude a `ref-metrics-*` package from using their build tooling of choice.

A complex build system (which docker certainly is) does make it harder to consume these packages. In a perfect world one could simply `pip install ref-metrics-ilamb ref-metrics-esmvaltool` and run a metric locally in a notebook (assuming the source data were available). This would be without the extra complexity that comes from running these metrics in a distributed fashion like we intend to do in production.

Reviewer 2: > AFAIK EsmValTool is the only benchmarking package that has a hard dependency on Conda? @bouweandela

It has many dependencies that are not available on PyPI. It is probably possible to install many of those dependencies using an OS package manager, but it is not something we support. We do provide docker containers: https://hubgw.docker.com/r/esmvalgroup/esmvaltool

will not require any complex to install dependencies, 

> but science packages may require more complex dependencies.

Reviewer 2: If I understand it correctly, we're not planning to do any science in the REF. The science should happen in the metrics/diagnostics packages. Therefore I would not expect that we need any science dependencies.

Author: Correct. But the ref-metric-* packages would pull those science dependencies in. Those metric provider packages probably should live outside of the `cmip-ref` repository like you suggested for the example package. That example package could then become a template.  It would also provide some flexibility for metrics packages to use whatever package installer they need.

I'll update the text to reflect this.

dependencies are required for a particular package.

The CI times may become longer. This may be somewhat insidious
as at the beginning the developer experience will be great.
This will gradually degrade as the number of packages/providers increases.
The test for each provider can be run as a separate job.
We may also choose to target a single Python version if it becomes an issue.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

A mono-repo structure will enable the rapid development of the project while it is immature
and in a state of flux.
It will be easier to refactor code as it is all in the same repository.

- Splitting out each package to a separate repository is a possibility
and is a very common approach in the Python community.
The tooling for managing mono-repos is more mature than it was a few years ago which enables the proposed approach.
The downside of that is that changes across multiple repositories will be required as we add new features.
- A single package with extras.
The downside of this is that it will be harder to incorporate new providers as they will be incorporated
into the main package.

> The framework will be an application rather than a library so pip installing it will not be as useful.

Author: Pulling in the comments from @nocollier into a thread
> The framework will be an application rather than a library...

Can't it be both? I do this in ILAMB. It is a library but when installing I provide scripts to the setup:

[rubisco-sfa/ILAMB@6780ef0/setup.py#L109](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ILAMB/blob/6780ef0824a8a245ae60e518d5b5fc25f970f3d6/setup.py#L109)

These are placed in your PATH when the package is installed and can be invoked like executables.

Author: And the response from @lee1043 

> I second @nocollier's idea -- it might can be both. PMP does the same as ILAMB does -- it is an application and library, [setup.py](https://github.com/PCMDI/pcmdi_metrics/blob/main/setup.py?rgh-link-date=2024-10-30T15%3A41%3A39Z) for installation. It can also installed via conda.

Author: ```suggestion
The `ref-api` will be an application rather than a library likely requiring additional non-scientific dependencies and would generally be run as a docker container/s.
The rest of the REF system should be pip/conda installable to enable reuse.
```

The framework that I was referring to here was the API aka the production-ready workflow. I would like to keep that somewhat thin with most of the logic happening in the core package. Perhaps we could include some CLI tooling in the core package.

I agree that a package can do both, but the `ref-api` service will be dependency-heavy and will likely not be pip-installable as it will (likely) be run via docker. It will have to interact with a local database or maybe even be a django application if an API turns out to be the best way of integrating with ESGF. 

You could add those additional dependencies as extras, but that does require guarding against missing imports. This is an extension of that which, in my experience, is easier to manage and much more explicit.

I would love if the rest of the system didn't require docker and was pip/conda installable so that it is reusable.
As an end user I would want to be able to run metric execution directly in a notebook or another workflow, but don't need the database etc you could install just the metrics packages of interest (in the same environment if possible) and run locally.
